First up this afternoon for the Better Regional Boundaries Bill, we're
hearing Max Marshall.
He's here.
Max, welcome. I'm looking at the screen.
I was like, "He's here."
Welcome, Max.
Yeah, I was looking at the screen as well.
Max, we've got five minutes with you, and that's inclusive of question time-
Yes
... if you want people to ask that. So over to you.
Okay.
Good morning, Chair, members of the panel.
Thanks for
giving me an opportunity to speak
this afternoon.
I want to start by saying how boundaries do not only serve the
territory they enclose,
they are also significant for trade and interaction with others.
In terms of boundary lines restricting wealth and its flow,
the problem points to the state's
capacity to better regulate the distribution of wealth through boundary settings.
Boundaries are not
borders. Instead, they serve as conductors
for connecting- ... parts of the whole.
Instead of
boundaries being primarily about
orientated to
being all about the territory and its people.
For a more expansive way of seeing itself as part of
connection inside of a view that is part of the national whole,
the boundaries don't define us. They show us our connection
towards the view of a national
unitary state as a complete whole.
New Zealand has
suffered traditionally,
or historically, from provincialism, which threatens to undermine its
unitary state, if not seriously impede its
effectiveness.
The Clifford Bay Port idea is an example of something which would've made
sense in terms of a national network,
but was sabotaged by local parochial interests.
Each of the regions look towards their own economic activity, not
to the benefit of a nation-building project.
And I give examples of ports competing in the share of
volume exchange, how this is an unhealthy
race to the bottom.
I don't
disagree current sporting competition can be good for
regional rivalry. We have regular fixtures
where this is healthy. But outside of this, there's nothing healthy at
all. Indeed, they do not serve us well or the
concept of the unitary state. The unintended
consequences of this translates into transport and
airline travel. It's a kind of spoils system in terms of legacy
carriers dominating hubs and routes.
This failure is perpetuated in terms of our public transport being
allocated on a local government basis for internal
services, not regional public transport.
The main intercity service is run without any public money
by a private enterprise as a monopoly by this
private interest, who serves as its successor
via series of permutations from the
New Zealand Railways bus service.
The result of this arrangement, capitalizing profitability model,
comes at the expense of smaller centers.
Indeed, in this township of Murupara in
Whakatane District Council, the removal of buildings represents
a loss or inability to draw better regional boundaries.
Boundaries act like conduits, not obstacles,
to distribute
commodities such as wealth and facilitate economic exchange across the nation,
instead of concentrating in silos in a few
locations. The civil
emergency flooding in the township of Ohura in the King Country
reminded the country of the town's existence for one week, but it
also served to remind us of our failure as a nation state to
achieve this corporate integrity of
serial structural misalignment and failure.
So I welcome any change in the bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
We've got a minute left. Are there any questions that people have for
Max?
No questions. Actually, can I just say that that was very useful
for us.
Do you know where Ohura is?
Ohura?
Yeah.
It used to have a VOR navigation aid for flying, the Ohura VOR-
Yeah
... up in the middle of the North Island.
It was a really helpful aid until they got rid of the VOR. So there you go.
Yeah.
Fun story-
There you go
... for you about Ohura.
Yes, yes. Cool. Well, thank you again.
Thank you very much, Max. We really appreciate that. That's great.
Okay.
Okay, that brings us on to Local Government New Zealand,
and it looks like we have Ralph and Jan joining us
online.
Good afternoon. Can you hear me?
Good afternoon. Thank you for the two of you for joining us
here this afternoon, and your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you, which will be inclusive of questions as
well. So I'm going to just hand straight to you.
Well, kia ora koutou, members of the select committee, and to yourself,
Chair Tenisi.
I'm Dan Gordon. I'm the Vice President of Local Government New Zealand, and I'm
also the Mayor for Waimakariri.
Joining me today is LGNZ's Principal Policy
Advisor, Ralph Hawkes.
Good to have you here as well, Ralph.
Firstly, I'll take it that the LGNZ submission
has been read, and we just really want to take this opportunity
to emphasize mainly three things
First, we strongly support the intent of this bill.
Central government is often directing local government to
align with various central government priorities and processes.
So it's great to see a bill that would require central government
to be more efficient and work with us together.
So just firstly I wanted to say that.
Secondly, LGNZ's only recommended change to the bill is
around the commencement date and the transition period.
We want to avoid central government departments redrawing
boundaries
at the exact same time as councils are potentially redrawing
under the simplifying local government.
So our submission sets out three possible ways for the committee to better
align this bill with simplifying local government,
and LGNZ would be very happy to work with the committee
and/or the member in charge of this bill to work through
those options.
Finally, a point that is just out of the scope of this bill
is that LGNZ would love to see Parliament pick up other
opportunities
for alignment between central and local government.
We talk in the submission about spatial planning
as part of the new resource management system and also
transport planning. One other area that's been raised with
LGNZ by councils is electorate boundaries
should be changed to also better align with local government
boundaries.
There are a number of potential changes under the
Electoral Act of 1993 that could do this.
Now, talking about transport planning, the bit that's often a
frustration is the
better aligning of the timing of the government policy statement,
and the timing also of long-term plans and the
preparation where councils need to get on and do regional policy
statements, working at a regional level, and then the formation
of the National Land Transport Plan.
It's hugely inefficient the way this is put together now and wastes a
whole lot of time and effort. If there is a way of getting this
process aligned, that would actually be a much better
way of us all working together. So we thought we'd just take the
opportunity, in the spirit of what the bill's trying to achieve, to
raise some other points that we think would make a difference.
And it's ultimately about being better for everyone
as our processes are better aligned.
So look, thank you very much for the opportunity to present,
and we will be very happy to answer any questions, should you have
any.
Thank you very much.
And the difficult ones, pass to Ralph.
Thank you very much. And the first question is with Tim Cost-
Costly. I was going to say Costa. Costly.
Thank you. Thanks, Medan and Ralph for joining us.
And I did really appreciate the submission, particularly around your second point,
which I wanted to just ask about, which is the timing and the phasing on it.
I thought you offered some really
pragmatic solutions on how you could adjust it to still sort of hit the same
point at which the new boundaries come in, but maybe delaying the start for areas
that are still working through boundaries.
I guess what I want to sort of drill down to is obviously some councils are going
to go through a headstart pathway now for the next election in '28.
Some won't be done until the '31 election.
Are you pretty comfortable that after that
2031 local government election,
that boundaries could take effect
at whatever the appropriate time is?
And I appreciate government agencies will say how much time they need after that to
do their side of the bargain. But from a local government
perspective, you just want to get through any amalgamations and redrawing
of boundaries up until 2031, and after that,
you're sort of open to what that looks like?
I think we are, but I just want to point, Tim, and thank you for your question.
We're dealing with imperfect information at the moment, where there's not a
bill in place for
simplifying local government. So it's based on what we're hearing through the
officials and through, obviously, the ministers.
So,
look, we just want to caution that with just saying subject to
understanding the detail. We understand in headstart,
those that want to go through that, there'll be some
announcements in September and backstop, which is the,
as you indicated, we're likely to get more detail
next year, we're advised. So it's just a caveat on that.
And look, our officials and our team at LGNZ would be more than
happy to work on what suitable wording could be put
there,
if there's a willingness to do that, because we just want it to work.
And the reform that's proposed is an acceptance that
that is happening. We just want to make sure that it all aligns and
at the end of the day, certainty for our communities.
Thank you. And just the other half of it was, we heard from the Mayor of
Horowhenua this morning. I've heard directly from a few other mayors around the
South Island. But can you give us a taste of, from your
experience in local government on what this looks like
on the ground in terms of when you have-- maybe you're
meeting
as a mayor with different government agencies that work across your area, or the
frustrations that you hit where you hit these overlapping boundaries.
Do you have a
firsthand example you could share with us on why this change is important?
I think the change is important just to make sure everyone's on the same page,
really, and where it's best aligned for our communities.
I can think of a number
in my particular district, if I'm asked about that,
where our boundaries don't entirely align.
And neither do our electorate boundaries align.
I've got sheer boundaries with two
members of Parliament.
So
on the ground, I think it would make a real difference.
It'd be a lot easier for our communities as well if we could
make this, and this bill becomes law.
And I think that's the intent behind what we're supporting, because it makes sense.
Thank you.
Okay, I've got two more questions.
Let's see if we can get them in in the three minutes left. Andy first.
Yeah. Dan, lovely to see you as always, and nice to see you too, Ralph.
Two quick questions if I can. The first one was just the
officials have advised they haven't actually done any work in terms of the cost
of reframing government agencies, but they've advised it's not going to be
insignificant,
or could be significant. Have you got any observations on how
much would you be willing to pay for this proposition?
And the second one was just in terms of your timing issues, and better alignment
with the land transport arrangements, which I'm very sympathetic to.
I know it's out of scope, but you're crossing boundaries there too.
Would it be helpful if we had a four-year term?
We actually had a little bit more time to be able to align LTPs and
NLTPs, et cetera.
Probably it's out of my expertise around what the cost for
implementation might be, but the point I'd raise is
that what's the cost of
leaving it and not doing it properly?
I would say, actually, it shouldn't be as costly as perhaps
is being anticipated. That's what the question is, and maybe Ralph might want to
offer some more points. Around four-year terms, fully support
four-year terms. It makes absolute sense.
I've been in local government now, this is my 22nd year
as an elected member.
You're getting up there.
We're getting up there, and I just think personally, it's
like parliamentary, I think it should be the same and aligned.
Four-year terms make a lot of sense, so that's something that we're on record as
supporting, because it makes sense both from a
parliamentary perspective but also a local government perspective.
Ralph, I don't know if you've got a comment you'd like to make on either of those
points?
Yeah. Again, I agree, we don't have the expertise of how much
exactly this would cost government agencies.
But I want to emphasize another point in our submission, which is that this has
been something that has been discussed for quite some time, and actually,
there are a number of cabinet papers, I think, under the last government talking
about
how they wanted to do this around the time of the Public Service Act reforms.
So it's been something that has been on the cards and needed for
quite some time. And so this bill is a very
welcome thing to prompt that action, and a long
transition period should mean that there's not significant
cost
spike and that those costs can be eased over time.
With the simplifying local government changes, this is actually the perfect
time, potentially, to be doing this once those boundaries
have been finalized, and that's just our submission there around alignment.
So once those boundaries have been finalized, hopefully they will be
enduring for some time, which is the perfect time for central government to be
redrawing their administrative boundaries.
So we think this is a very timely bill, as long as it can align with
simplifying local government. Thanks.
Right. Quickly, Mike.
Thank you. Just quickly.
Thanks, Mayor Dan, for outlining your strong support for the intention of
this bill. I just want to clarify that that strong support, I guess,
is contingent on it staying with the local government
boundaries and also making sure it aligns properly with the
reform you're going through?
That's the points that we're making, Mike.
You picked it up well. Just think it makes sense to do that and to have
it contingent on that basis. But generally, I
just want to make it clear, we do support the intent of this bill, and as Ralph
said, we've been following it for some time, so it makes
sense to make the changes that are proposed.
Great. Thank you very much for your time here this afternoon.
Really appreciate that submission. Thank you.
Thank you.
And that brings us to Te Tatau o Te Arawa,
Jude Pane.
Kia ora.
Sorry. Just let me...
Not too sure if it's working.
Rawiri.
Kia ora.
Tena koe.
Kia ora. Right. We've got 10 minutes with you. Thank you for your submission.
You can take that as read. That's inclusive of questions as well,
if there's time. So over to you.
No problem. Hoeano e mihi atu ana ki a koutou. Kei te pai whakawa.
E te horo ra Jan Tinitti, tena koe. Hoeano e mihi
atu ana ki a koutou. Oh, well, I'll get straight to it.
So,
yeah. Rawiri Waru tēnei. I'm the chair of
Te Tatau o Te Arawa, who sit as a partner
working with the Rotorua Lakes Council to represent the views of the Te Arawa
iwi i roto within the boundaries, current boundaries of the Rotorua
Lakes District.
We actually wanted to put in a
submission here. We felt it was really important
to understand a few things. There's been a lot of kōrero going around about
what I've just been listening to so far,
but very little about tribal boundaries.
Why we bring that up is because
we actually-- let me step back a bit.
We actually support the bill in terms of the intent.
I think there's some gaps in there, though, and this is how we felt around,
we're working with regional boundaries, we're working with local government
boundaries, but there are also boundaries in terms of the tribal boundaries
of iwi hapū.
Why are we bringing this up? And you'll see, take it as read, but I just want
to reinforce the kaupapa around. There are
current arrangements- Agreements,
treaty obligations, all those kind of things within particular
rohe or iwi.
Now, it makes sense to us that
in order to have those
fully, I suppose, upheld,
they would need to be recognized
when actually the boundaries are made.
We think if boundaries are made without taking that into regard,
things could get messier,
and things could actually become a lot more,
what was that, challenging in terms of having
different parts of a settlement, i.e., some lands might be in a
different rohe, and that's that cross over of different rohe,
as we have some of that already going on.
For example, Te Arawa Lakes Trust, they have mandate over the lakes
and within the Te Arawa rohe in the Rotorua area.
So there are particular obligations that the Crown
have made and have to uphold moving
forward.
We have land ownership, forests,
all sorts within this rohe. So it makes sense to us
that-
Sorry
... these
things must be considered, or it could actually cause more work
down the track. And I think we
want to support the kōrero around the efficiencies,
administrative efficiencies, but it can't just be solely based on
administrative efficiencies. There has to be some other
regard and other whakaaro in terms of iwi, hapū, rohe, Tiriti o
Waitangi, treaty settlement legislation, statutory acknowledgments,
co-governance and co-management arrangements, natural catchments, and
existing Crown relationships.
These all need to come into the thinking for this bill.
And I say that
understanding that, I know
government is not just simply going to draw lines on a map and go, that things will
be taken into account, but as far as we've seen with the limited information that
we've had,
I don't know if that's sort of in the forefront of the thinking.
So our basis
for our submission was just to bring that forward so then there is
understanding that
there's actually an opportunity here to really,
not tidy up, but to make these things efficient too.
If we're crossing over to different boundaries because of our
treaty settlements,
well, that just doubles up the work, right?
Got to work with two different unitary authorities, maybe three.
So
that doubles up the work, triples up in some places,
if that's what the lines determine.
But hey, these are things that need to be in the thinking,
and if they're not, I do feel there's going to be
some struggle
moving forward. And I think
basically that's the whole kaupapa of our submission.
There's other things in there, statutory powers, catchment governance,
co-governance arrangement, representation,
the simplifying local government reforms.
It's all in there, and this is where we think
the thinking
maybe needs a bit more attention.
And I think it could actually
result in a positive thing
for
where we're going. So we support the kaupapa.
However, these things need to be taken into account, or you might end up making
more work for yourselves as government.
So I'll leave it there. I don't want to take up too much of your time there, and so
happy to take questions if there are any.
Kia ora raou. Very useful. Does anyone have any
questions here?
I've-
Yeah, I've actually got one here from Tim Costley.
Tena koe.
Yeah, tena koe.
I've heard arguments for and against the iwi boundaries, partly being
the paramauro here, that they're a bit disputed
about where the exact boundary lies.
So I'd be interested in how we resolve that, but also, you make some really
good points. I think it was about the lake that you were talking about.
But obviously this is about aligning government departments
that are providing support to people in each region.
There was a suggestion from one submitter that
we should separate out the ones that deal with natural entities, that deal with our
waterways, that deal with our environment.
Mm-hmm.
If that was built around catchments or built around iwi boundaries,
would that in part address some of the concerns you have in letting
families and whanau be aligned to where they live to get
support from agencies like MSD or
education or health?
Well, I think, I can't speak for all iwi, but I can
certainly speak on behalf of- ... the people for Te Arawa,
is that
we see that it makes sense if we were all in the
one area. These things would actually help the different
agencies address things directly and have a,
well, more effectively, I feel, more efficiently, more effective.
Because you're dealing with one
kaupapa, one hapū, one
iwi in a particular rohe. All that information is all
there. Now, if you split them up,
and I know it's an agency thing, but Maori are still very
tribal in terms of their thinking around where their boundaries are.
You mentioned disputes. Yes, that's still happening.
And so that's another thing you'd have to take into account, things that haven't
been settled yet. So where does that sit?
Does that stay in the gray area, or are we just going to cut a line through there
and when they sort stuff out, we'll make a call then?
I think this is an opportunity to really,
I suppose, implement some things there, new policy
Around how we deal with those things.
I see it from a Te Arawa point of view, it makes more sense to-
Oh, you've muted yourself, I think.
Yeah.
Never mind.
Sorry. Technology, great when it works, b****r when it doesn't.
But, hey,
we just see it that it makes more sense, there'll be a more direct relationship, I
think. And then because of that, the relationship would be strengthened.
And also the people who are delivering the services that you mentioned
would actually have time to actually grow those
relationships and understand the landscape in which they are serving the people.
Now, this doesn't actually just stay with iwi.
This actually can be good for all people.
That's our view.
That's helpful.
Rāwiri, I have a quick question. So the regional public
service areas now, you'd be in the Bay of Plenty.
So in there you would have the Tauranga three iwi.
There would be Te Arawa, there'd be Tūwharetoa,
and others, I'm sure as well, the Tupou iwi
that would come into there as well.
How do you work with other iwis within that rohe now?
Well, if I can just premise my korero saying our
preferred model, that we're actually talking about now, which has been
quite hard out because there's been
a lot of information to spread to our people and our chairs and all that, our
leadership here.
The
Western Bay's, I think you know, they have their kaupapa Tapuika and Waitaha.
If you go down to Tūwharetoa, that's with the Taupo District
Council down there. Also, Rotorua,
District Council, Lakes Council.
So all the iwi actually as a
waka, Te Arawa waka, makes sense to us.
We all-
Yes
... get together anyway to do these things.
However, when there's
things required for Tapuika and Waitaha, well,
from our point of view, we're not able to actually have any
support for them, our uri, because they
are governed by
the local district of Western Bay's.
Over here in Rotorua, we are on our own district council,
Taupo District Council, sorry, with Tūwharetoa.
But we see sense in everything coming together, because we're not silly.
We know things are going to come together in one shape or another.
So we're just saying, this is to us makes the best sense is to come
together. Then you're dealing with a waka katoa,
and that's when you really get things going and able to understand the total
landscape from an iwi perspective.
That's great. Thank you so much, Rāwiri.
That does bring us to the end of our time, and that was very useful.
Thank you very much.
Tena koutou. Kai kona.
Kia ora. So that brings us to New Zealand Initiative,
and I understand we've got Nick waiting to present
to us. So
he's online.
Thanks, Max.
Okay, Nick, welcome, and wonderful to have you here.
You know how this works. Ten minutes with you in case of questions.
So I'll hand over to you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair and members of Select Committee, and really
appreciate this opportunity to present on the Better Regional Boundaries Bill.
I'm Nick Clark. I'm a senior fellow at the New Zealand Initiative.
I've worked on local government policy issues for nearly 25 years
at Business New Zealand, Federated Farmers, and now the Initiative.
Let me say first that
I and we at the Initiative welcome this bill.
Tim Costley, he's identified a real problem, and he deserves credit for
raising it. The problem is real. Government agencies carve the country
into different and often overlapping boundaries.
For people who live near a boundary, the result can be confusing, costly,
and occasionally harmful.
And there are a number of examples from the first reading debate that made that
plain, from social housing in Otaki to an ambulance taking a
patient to the wrong hospital. So we certainly support the
objective.
It's just weird and a pity that it's taking a
bill to
get this to happen. And I guess we would prefer
a bill not to be needed, that this sort of thing could happen
logically and rationally by government agencies
going ahead and getting on with it.
We do have a few concerns about the bill as a
means to achieve the admirable intention.
First of all, as it says in the submission, it could be regarded
as too weak to compel change. It's
expressly unenforceable, according to one clause.
It doesn't say who wins when two agencies disagree, and it
doesn't say whether the building block is at the district level or the regional
level. And that can be a bit of an issue where
sometimes the regional boundaries don't align with the district
boundaries within their areas. And Taupo, which
sits across four regions, I think shows the problem, but it's not just Taupo,
it's also Rotorua.
Waitaki and Stratford also have bits of their districts which are
in different regions.
It could also be regarded as being probably maybe a little bit too heavy-handed or
too strong if taken seriously. So a blanket
duty could force agencies to redraw structures
around how they
actually deliver. So conservation around catchments, hospitals
around referral networks. And if that sort of structure
has to be changed because of territorial boundaries-
That could be quite disruptive and expensive.
And because this bill is a member's bill, there isn't a regulatory impact
statement or cost benefit. And that's totally
understandable, but it's something that it does mean the committee does have to do
a bit of heavy lifting to get that sort of information.
And also, the bill is probably a little narrow or at least unclear.
Maybe there's some things that need to be added to add some
clarity.
For example, it binds departments and Crown agents, but much of the
frontline is delivered by contracted providers.
And so, for example, the ambulance services
are charities. There's this
St John Ambulance and the Wellington Free Ambulance, and their
boundaries aren't quite right, not quite rightly aligned.
But they're commissioned by Health NZ and ACC, so presumably,
the
bill should probably extend to those contracting
areas, whether that's indirectly via the government agencies or
directly.
But the bill doesn't make that clear.
There's also the timing problem, and this is the
government's Head Start reforms and about they're going to be redrawing the
council map. And I'm not sure whether you're all aware, but the
initiative, myself, I've just put out a research note-
Yep
... just yesterday critiquing Head Start and offering alternatives,
approaches to council mergers.
And obviously, that's probably a little bit outside the scope of this bill,
but I'm always very happy to discuss our concerns about Head Start.
But putting aside those concerns for a moment, the bill does have a five-year
transition period, which is a good thing,
but there is a risk that agencies will be having to chase a
moving target under Head Start. And in fact, according
to the information that I've seen, is that if a council
decides to use the backstop process, it doesn't
put in a proposal under Head Start.
The process for actually
consolidating or merging or whatever probably wouldn't start till
after 2028, or 2028 local elections.
So it could be that it's not till 2031 that we have a
new set of councils fully in place.
So five years from this year would be pretty much at that
limit.
But underneath all this is a simple point from our perspective.
So aligning council boundaries to central
boundaries is administrative tidying within a centralized
system, and tidy lines on a map don't move power.
As members are probably aware, the New Zealand initiative is very keen on
localism and on devolution.
We're not
keen at all on centralization.
And that's what we think the end game should be.
If this bill can help by aligning the central government
boundaries with local government boundaries and lead to devolution
and localism, that would be fantastic.
But at this stage,
I'm not sure.
Just moving the boundaries isn't going to be a guarantee of that, but we would like
to see that.
So as I said before, much of what the bill wants to be done could be
done now without legislation, and that would be
cheaper and more flexible. That's how most other countries have done it,
apparently. And our submission asks the committee to recommend that
strongly, and rather than just disappearing into the black hole, actually
requiring government agencies to actually
report on how it's doing on that basis.
But if Parliament does prefer a law, and we're certainly not against that,
it does need some work. And our submission recommends, for
example, replacing the blanket duty with a presumption of alignment
that agencies can at least rebut with good reason.
It could go a bit further and exempt agencies that don't deal with the public, like
the Department of Conservation, which we mentioned in our submission.
And there's probably a few others like the New Zealand Customer Service, the
Defense Force, NPI maybe, Maritime New Zealand, the Civil
Aviation Authority. It wouldn't be efficient or
effective to require them to have to align their boundaries
to territorial authorities, I wouldn't have thought.
But also, you should name a default building block, whether that's
territorial or regional or groupings of territorial authorities
or regions.
And I think also would be great to get some sort of baseline and cost
estimate as well if you can.
And as we say, we're very keen on devolution, so we would like
some sort of
acknowledgement that that's a good thing, although that's obviously contested
politically.
But obviously, we support the goal of the bill, and we think it's great that it's
been brought to the attention of Parliament.
We just think the bill needs work to reach it, and I'm very happy to take
questions now if there are any.
Thanks, Nick. We've got a couple of minutes left, and I've got a question from Andy
Foster.
Yeah. Look, thanks, Nick. And, yes, I would be very keen to follow up on local
government structural stuff as well.
Do that later on. But just wanted to ask you, the cost bit that concerns me.
We've got no advice yet about what the cost might be.
Where are we going to put that into the process in your view?
Because this is the submission process.
We'll cogitate on it. We'll probably try and get some advice on that.
That could be quite a bit of work, they've advised us, and they've advised the cost
could be significant. So where do we insert
that?
Do we do it before we
decide on the bill-
I mean-
... or is it after?
Yeah. It's a very good question. And it may be that--
I'm just thinking out loud here, so please-
No, fire through
... excuse me for thinking aloud.
Obviously, ideally, you'd have a good indication of the costs and benefits
before passing a law. That would be the
ideal.
It's possible that you could put in place a process in the
legislation for
determining
Um, whether
government agencies either should be
included within this, and if so,
how they go about this. And it could be that inside that
process,
there could be a provision that
requires some sort of cost-benefit analysis of some sort.
That at least has to be considered and disclosed for
decision-makers, and then either that results in
a let's go, or amend, or
a don't go there. It's possible it could be put
into legislation, but there are other acts that have cost benefit
analysis requirements in them. The current RMA has a Section
32 requirement for a net benefit test.
So, it's not unheard of,
but obviously, ideally, we would have a good indication of the cost and
benefits before the bill has
left this committee.
Okay. Thank you, Nick. We're actually out of time.
I did have another question here, but hopefully that's from Tim Costley, and
hopefully you might be able to talk together outside of
this process.
For sure. Very happy to, Tim.
Great. Thank you. Thank you very much for your time here
this afternoon.
Thank you.
So we now brings us onto our last submitter of the day, and that's John
William Pohepa from the Family Estate of Hereditary
Chiefs.
And then there's the
supplementary.
So Retail NZ are not speaking to us today?
We've just got-
No, there's one more to go, and it's Retail New Zealand, I think, and
they will be scheduled in another time. Is that right?
Retail New-
Yes.
Yeah.
Correct. Yeah.
Have we got...
We're not sure whether that's going to happen.
The name doesn't match with the-
Oh, right. Okay.
But, um
yeah.
They've declined?
The line's dead.
Okay. So that's-
That's-
That's it. Okay.
That's it.
We could've had the time for a-
Little more time
Yeah. So, okay. Thank you. Rightyoh.
Well, that now means that we're moving into private session.
Thank you